Title:	Waxing and Waning: Delirium
Author:	W. Howard Buddin Jr., Ph.D.
Web:	http://neuropsychnow.com
Date:	03/02/2013
Tags:	Delirium,  
Base Header Level:	1


We all learn about delirium during the course of our education and training. Not all of us get to see what it looks like, though, in all its varied forms. Delirium is a syndrome marked by a sudden change in mental status as the result of any number of shifts in homeostasis. Its causes include sepsis, uncontrolled diabetes, withdrawal from alcohol, or allergic reaction to anesthesia used during a surgical procedure. The presentation of delirium is not uniform and is as varied as its causes -- hence its classification as a syndrome. 

Acute delirium is relatively easy to identify, especially when the individual is admitted as an inpatient as a direct result of their mental status change. One hallmark identifier - if *we* are fortunate enough - is an alarmed and confused family. They'll tell you that this is not normal: "he's not a violent person…" or "It just happened so suddenly. She woke up in the middle of the night and didn't know where she was. Swore it wasn't our house. She wouldn't get near me…" and on, and on. Sometimes, though, delirium is chronic and insidious. It can persist, unchecked, as the product of an ongoing, unidentified process. It can be hard to spot. Really, really hard. The more there is going on with the patient, the harder it gets. 

I recently saw a patient whom I estimated, based on medical records and the family's report, had been chronically delirious for over a year. The family was understandably incredulous. How could it be that so many specialists over that period of time had never so much as *mentioned* this to them? Good question. I wondered the same thing, though to say as much could have the harmful secondary effect of undermining relationships with their other healthcare providers. I abandoned
the "whys" and "hows" answer strategy; I did not want to walk the tightrope of being an apologist for other providers while at once trying to explain the variegated nature of delirium. Instead, I offered something that at once explained the nature of delirium and why it was/is so difficult to spot. 

I likened it to the moon: sometimes, it's big, bright, and impossible to miss. Other times, it's there but is just a sliver of its full self. Other times still, you can't see it, but it's still there. 

